Hello friends and welcome back to my
channel. This is a special edition
because the Norway verdict is in.
And we need to talk about it.
So, unfortunately,
but also not shocking, Norway voted in
favor of the Jehovah's Witnesses in this
case.
They didn't do it because they were
saying your practices are all fine,
there's nothing wrong going on. They did
it purely because they did not have
enough legal backing to completely
remove the state subsidies. So, let's
start off by just going through a little
bit of a timeline of what exactly has
been happening in Norway for those of
you that maybe are not fully aware. So,
to start off, in 2022, Norway removed
state funding, which was about 1.5
million dollars a year that Jehovah's
Witnesses were getting.
And they revoked their legal
registration.
Which means,
Jehovah's Witnesses were not banned,
they could still practice as they
wanted, they were just not legally
recognized as a religion, which then
entitled them to that 1.5 million a
year. And the reasoning for doing this
was what they claimed were shunning and
exclusion practices, the impact it had
on children, and the right to leave
freely. All of these Norway said was
against human rights, which it is. Then
in 2024, the district court agreed with
the government
and said that Jehovah's Witness
practices were actually violating laws
protecting children and individual
freedom. Well, then Jehovah's Witnesses
pushed it further. 2025, they went to
the court of appeals where the Jehovah's
Witnesses won. The decision was
reversed, and the removing of funding
and registration was viewed as invalid
or unlawful. And that is what took it to
Supreme Court, which is the current
stage it was in. The government was
appealing the decision before that JWs
won, and that is the verdict that just
came in early this morning, and we're
going to talk about it. Okay? I went
through the articles I posted, I've
looked at Reddit stuff. It was a three
to two vote that won in favor of
Jehovah's Witnesses and them being able
to be a registered religion. So, let's
talk a little bit about what the
government state side of the argument
was. And that was they argued that
leaving the religion
came with losing your entire social
world. So, this became kind of the core
issue.
Was were these practices, the shunning,
disfellowshipping, all of that, were
these human rights
issues. Jehovah's Witnesses, of course,
in court lied through their teeth like
they love to do.
And unfortunately,
their lying worked. One thing that they
used in court, the Jehovah's Witness
lawyers talked about how they don't
recognize the word like shunning or
shunned.
They call it like distancing or social
distancing, and that's all they do. The
Jehovah's Witnesses are very calculated
in their wording they use in their
publications, the Shepherd the Flock
book. In fact, even this year with the
or last year with the update to the
Shepherd the Flock book, they changed
the wording of how to handle
disfellowshipped family members or
disassociated ones.
In the past, they had the whole section
of what would be considered
like brazen conduct, which under that
talked about unnecessary continued
association with disfellowshipped
non-relatives, but also it talks about
undue association with disfellowshipped
or disassociated relatives
basically showed that they were
violating the spirit of the
disfellowshipping decree, and it would
mean they do not qualify for
congregation privileges. And
it said if they were persistent,
they might be dealt with judicially.
The new wording has changed. For family
members, it has just a tiny little
section that now says, "A committee
should be formed if despite repeated
counsel, an individual persists in
associating with a relative who is
promoting apostate teachings or wrong
conduct."
So, that little change of wording,
before it was just like undue
association, period, not if it's X, Y,
or Z. Now they're saying only if they
are promoting apostate teachings or
wrong conduct. So, that to me is their
way of being like,
"Family relationships don't change.
Those that could be spiritually harmful
to us, we would obviously not associate
with, but I think it covers their a
little bit." Okay, though. So, let's go
back to this Norway decision. The state
argued that this wasn't just mild
distancing, this was completely being
cut off. You lose your entire family,
friends, entire support system. They
were just trying to push that yes, there
is a cost, a major cost to exit this
religion, which then impedes on human
rights. Jehovah's Witnesses, on the
other hand, were arguing that leaving is
technically voluntary. People can walk
away at any time,
and that the state should not interfere
with religion doctrine.
Which again, technically yes, that is a
religious freedom thing to be able to
practice your doctrines and how you
handle things within your religious
community.
And
technically speaking, yes, you can leave
voluntarily. You can walk away at any
point, but the issue comes with the
consequences to that leaving. So, with
this Supreme Court decision, what they
were saying
is that the government cannot deny
Jehovah's Witnesses their state funding
and registration
because of religious freedom.
What this did not mean
is
that the court was approving that the
shunning was okay. It was not saying
that their practices were not harmful.
It was not denying that there is true
harm and hurt that happened to the
people who leave. The court was just
stating that it believed the government
went too far in trying to regulate a
religious group.
Which again, I can kind of understand.
Religion is something that
is protected under governments. It's a
sticky situation, and again, as much as
I hate this verdict, I can kind of
understand where they're coming from.
Now, for us ex-Jehovah's Witnesses,
those of us who have left and walked
away, and we know the gravity of what it
actually looks like,
this feels
like a
punch to the stomach that the hurt you
endure when you're shunned
is basically not a valid enough reason
to remove a religion's state funding and
their registration. And it feels like
this verdict was not protecting
children and the people who have been
really hurt by it. The sad reality is,
no matter what the verdict would have
been,
Jehovah's Witnesses would never have
changed
their shunning practices.
It is something that they use to control
their people. And unfortunately, those
of us that have been hurt to our core by
the shunning know deep down that's never
going to go anywhere. The just the
the second that goes away is when that
religion completely disappears. Shunning
keeps people blind to the reality of
what the outside world is really like.
So,
again, this is not
a real win for the Jehovah's Witnesses.
They have been exposed in a very big
spotlight that will forever have people
looking at them, I think, a little bit
differently. Just because they won this
doesn't mean that their actions have
ever been justified or will be
justified. The only thing that this
Supreme Court judgment showed was that
they did not meet the threshold of being
in clear violation of human rights. They
got close. The court was basically
saying that threshold is very high, and
while yes, they got close to it, it
wasn't quite high enough. So, all this
came down to was legality. They had to
have concrete evidence that showed that
they 100%
have violated human rights, and there
was enough
on the Jehovah's Witness side that it
they couldn't have the legal ground to
stand on. One thing that it did bring
out, and I will make sure to have this
article linked below. Um I did have to
translate it, but he talked about how
courts should not interfere
in internal religious practices unless
there's evidence of clear harm.
Which that in itself is very frustrating
because there is clear harm done,
but at the same time, think about like I
sit here and go
I think about the pommies.
The people who are out there physically
out, mentally in, who have been
disfellowshipped, and they feel like I
deserve this. If every single person
that was excommunicated, every single
person that was disfellowshipped at some
point
actually came out and said, "This is
true harm," there would be more ground
to stand on. But unfortunately, there's
a lot of people who feel like they get
what they deserve, and that's just the
price they pay.
It's only those who walk away willingly
after being awake from what this actual
organization is, which is the cult, that
they actually realize how harmful these
practices are.
So again, I'll going to say it till I'm
blue in the face. I, as much as I hate
this, I can kind of understand. This was
purely a legal issue. This was not a
moral endorsement from the Supreme Court
saying shunning's good, it's fine, it's
great. No. They're literally just
saying, "Yes, we see this is a problem.
We don't have the legal ground to stand
on." And again, because it wasn't this
concrete
provable widespread harm, because you
still have those people who have been
disfellowshipped, kicked out, shunned,
who claim they deserved it. If every
single person
whoever was disfellowshipped said this
is unacceptable, I think we'd have a
different story here. But unfortunately,
you still have a huge chunk of people
who just feel like they're the ones in
the wrong because they're so conditioned
to think that this is a loving provision
from Jehovah. So obviously, there was
those that saw
how harmful these practices are.
But unfortunately, it was not strong
enough to override religious freedom.
I want to go back to
the fact that I strongly feel Jehovah's
Witnesses are a giant corporation. These
types of companies protect themselves at
all costs. They have tons of lawyers on
hand, and they know exactly the way to
word things and how to take the pressure
off of them if things like this happen
and they go to court for something. So
Jehovah's Witnesses have done a really
great job of protecting themselves in
any way they can.
This problem with all of this is
and something that
bothers me to my core despite the fact
that I knew this was most likely the
ruling that was going to happen, is that
this is going to just tell Jehovah's
Witnesses, because they're not going to
look deeply into these documents that
have happened or any of the court
things, they're going to see we won,
that means we're justified, and be done
with it.
What they won't do is sit back and
actually look at the mental toll that
shunning has on people or the toll it
has on a child who was raised in this.
When you were a child raised in this
organization, you have one path ahead of
you and that path is to stay a Jehovah's
Witness. At no point are you told,
whatever path you choose, your mom and
dad support you and we love you. No.
You know
you have to get baptized at some point.
You have to make the truth your own at
some point or else you were going to be
discarded so quickly.
And I feel like this is a case of on
paper
it doesn't look as harsh as it truly is.
Because again
the way they word things
makes it seem like it's a little bit
open to interpretation at times.
And unless you are somebody who lives,
breathes, and dies Jehovah's Witness and
you're in it and surrounded by it, you
don't truly grasp the level of coercion
and harm that this organization truly
has on not only your mental state, but
your emotional and even your physical
well-being at times. It's only when you
are living in this world of Jehovah's
Witnesses that you fully grasp the level
of control that happens in that
organization. I could have somebody give
them some articles to read and they
would read it and be like, well, yeah,
this seems a little extreme, but again
until you're surrounded by it, you don't
understand how horrible this
organization is.
And unfortunately, I just don't feel
like
these types of cases will ever
go against Jehovah's Witnesses long-term
because of how well they protected
themselves.
Okay, so long story short, just a quick
little summary.
The Supreme Court ruled in Jehovah's
Witness favor, not in the Norway state's
favor.
Norway was stating that there was harm
being done, that human rights were being
violated by the Jehovah's Witnesses by
their shunning policies and not making
it easy to leave without losing their
entire systems, where the Supreme Court
ruled basically stating that they didn't
have enough legal ground to stand on and
enough proof of actual harm being done
to override religious freedom.
Basically what it boils down to.
And while this bothers me so much and
upsets me, especially, you know my
story, the day we disassociated, we were
completely cut off from family and it's
been an extremely painful thing. And I
know so many others have dealt with this
as well. So this type of a ruling feels
like a slap in the face, invalidation
of our own pain we've endured, but at
the same time
I can kind of understand because if they
step on religious freedom, it's going to
be an issue not just for Jehovah's
Witnesses, but all others types of
things. So I can understand, as much as
I hate it, why this ruling happened.
With that being said they did not say
shunning is okay.
You know, it's okay that people lose
their social systems. They weren't
saying that. They were just saying to
the threshold that was meant to be met
to get that registration completely
revoked for good was not fully met.
That's it.
Um sorry, you was still got to go back
there. I want to finish off this video
by saying thank you to all of those in
Norway who have spoken out, who have
brought this to light, who have helped
provide information for the court stuff,
who have testified, who have been there
every day and reporting on these cases.
As painful as this verdict feels to so
many of us who have experienced
what this harm actually is
don't let this feel like an invalidation
to the feelings that we go through on
the daily basis. We have to realize that
this is purely a legality, but that does
not invalidate what we have gone through
and we continue to go through and the
fight we still have ahead of us. For me
personally, I will never stop speaking
out. Whether the Jehovah's Witnesses
ever fully disappear, I don't know. I
think they'll always be in a religion
that continue to harm people. The most
important thing is that the real world,
the people around them, those that are
in it, those that have left
see this organization for what it is.
And I do think there were some good that
came from this. I think it woke some
people up. I think it helped people get
out, but I also think it helped people
see, even if they've been out for
decades, you're not alone. There are
countless of us who have endured this
pain of leaving and being shunned. And
we will continue to fight for those who
don't have a voice and for those that
are stuck inside. I hope
that this shakes a few active Jehovah's
Witnesses into going
maybe our shunning is a little too
intense.
Maybe it isn't loving. Maybe we
shouldn't be doing this and hopefully
some people will allow themselves to
think for themselves
and say, I'm not going to shun my
family. I'm not going to shun my
daughter. I'm not going to shun my
father. I'm not going to shun my
grandchildren, whatever it may be. I
hope it shakes some and wakes them up
and I hope that these types of cases
continue to pop up.
Whether it's a win or a loss
I think it's important that just more
light is being shined on this
organization so people are actually
seeing
the harm it can do. I know recently
Spain had a court thing going on and
they basically said, I know there was a
lot of different people that reported on
this, that Spain wasn't themselves
saying like Jehovah's Witnesses are a
destructive cult. They were saying due
to freedom of speech, people can refer
to Jehovah's Witnesses as a destructive
cult without the Jehovah's Witnesses
going after them for defamation or
anything like that. That type of stuff,
those types of rulings
are so important to shine light on this
organization. So for everybody who is
feeling like I am today, where it's just
kind of like a frustration that
it feels like our feelings are invalid,
remember the entire world of billions of
people are watching these things unfold
and hopefully this means even a few
people who meet them out in service, who
could be someone they prey on, will go,
"I've heard too much about you, I'm
good." For those active Jehovah's
Witnesses that may stumble across this
video
I want you to take 1 second
and instead of gloating and feeling like
this is a win, think about the actual
pain that has been caused for countless
people who have left and lost
everything. It's unacceptable.
It is harmful.
And it is truly a painful experience to
go through. The Jehovah's Witnesses got
what they wanted and that was their
money.
They don't care about their reputation
as much as they care about their money.
So this is a win for them. I can't even
imagine the spin they'll have on this in
the next broadcast about how Jehovah has
helped them win, but the real fight is
going to continue every single day for
every single one of us who continues to
speak out against them
purely to help those
who have truly been harmed by this
organization and are trying to get out.
All right, everybody, that's the end of
the video. Um just a quick little
breakdown in my feelings on it. Um as a
reminder, this does not invalidate the
feelings that you've gone through when
you have been shunned.
The court was not saying that. The court
was not saying that it was okay. They
were purely saying they did not have
enough legal ground to stand on to
override religious freedom. So Jehovah's
Witnesses
you won this one, but guess what? You're
still being exposed every single day.
People are seeing you for who you are
and I'm going to do my part and that is
continue to speak out because there are
so many people who have been harmed by
this organization who deserve to feel
supported.
That's it. I'll see you guys in the next
video and let's have a good rest of day
despite this gloom hanging over [music]
us.
>> [music]